I am interviewing Nelson M. Duller. He's a
professor of physics. He lives at 818 North
Rosemary in Bryan. Now, as a matter of formality,
I'll ask, you know, I have to ask your name. Okay. So
what's your name, Dr. Duller? Nelson M. Duller,
and as you say, I'm a professor of physics and live
in Bryan, Texas. And you divide your activities in
between teaching and research. Yes, teaching and
research are my activities here at A&M. Okay. Why
did you originally come here? And when and why did
you originally come here? When I first came to A&M,
I came here as a student
back in, this is January of 1946. And I was, I had
gone to school, to college before that time, to a
university. I had gone to Rice before that time.
But my education had been interrupted by the war,
World War II. And I had spent two years at Rice as a,
not in physics or science, but actually as a, well,
mainly a liberal arts major in preparation, what I
thought would be for the law. I was preparing
what's called a pre-law undergraduate program at
Rice, which included a lot of language and
economics, but with some math and science, of
course. and philosophy and economics and all
those things.
But the war came along, and I was involved with the
war for three years or so. And when I got out of the
Army, I had thought a lot about going back to
college just before I was about to be discharged.
And I had decided that that I wanted to study either
engineering or science, like physics, something
of that sort, instead of law. I decided against law
for reasons which I really can't explain. I think
it was just a matter of drifting away from it.
During the time I was in the Army, I'd had some
science. I'd gone to New York University in a
special program, which they called in those days
the Army Specialized Training Program, ASTP,
which is kind of known to those who were involved
with university work in the Army days. They picked
out people who were interested in going to school
and sent some of us to school. I was in New York
University, and I got my first real good physics
there in math and things like that. And I decided
that I wanted to go into science, in particular
physics, in math. Well, when I got out of the Army,
it was in December of 1945.
And I was leaning toward A&M anyway. I knew A&M was a
good school. A&M sort of runs in my family. My
brother had gone to A&M, and my uncles, and
everybody I knew had gone to A&M except me. I was the
only one who had gone to Rice. I like Rice just fine.
Rice is a very good school. Although I don't think
it's quite as great now as I used to think it was for
some various completely spurious reasons. Some
of the attitudes the students have at basketball
games is pretty bad. But anyway, I came to A&M
because my brother got out of the Army almost
immediately after I did. And he and I decided we'd
go to school together here. And I could come here in
mid-year, which was a great advantage, and go in
the summers, as you know, or maybe you don't know,
at Rice. They don't have summer school. And they
don't allow students to enter at mid-year. They
don't have a regular semester. They have a year
long. They don't have students entering in
January. At least they didn't in those days. And to
my knowledge, they still don't. So these various
circumstances led me to come here, at least on a
trial basis. And once I got here, I liked it so much
that I wouldn't have considered leaving. And as I
say, I came in January of 1946. And I came in just
before the biggest influx of veterans, so-called
veterans, people who had been in the Army or Navy or
whatever. And the January... influx of veterans
was pretty big, but then in the fall, they really
came in. We were three and four to a room, normally
we're meant for two, that sort of thing. But it was
good. We were all pretty, quite serious and
interested in our work. We were all a little older,
of course, than most undergraduates were in those
days, or most undergraduates had been, rather, I
should say. And I liked A&M very much immediately.
I liked just everything about it. It was a good
place to be. I got to get away from, for
one thing, from home again, which was kind of
important to me because I don't think I could have
just sat around at home and studied after being
away for not so long in the war and all that sort of
thing. And being here, the general atmosphere was
conducive to serious work and enjoying being with
a bunch of other students. And of course, we had
good times. We'd go into Houston, visit with our
friends. And at that time, of course, I wasn't
married.
I wasn't very young, but I was still young enough to
wait to be married. Nobody had cars except a few
guys here and there. We'd all gang up and either
hitchhike or ride in the weekend. But it was A&M,
surprisingly, I'll be able to say A&M's changed a
lot. And I'll just say that, to me, A&M hasn't
changed all that much. A&M has always been a very
good school, from my point of view. In those days it
was great because there was the basic spirit, good
traditions, things that were fun and worthwhile.
And the same kinds of things are here now. The
difference is other people have joined A&M. Now,
of course, and we'll get to this later on, I'm sure,
we have people who are not necessarily in the
Corps, but who, I think, by and large, have similar
spirits, similar attitudes, and lots of same
basic feelings toward an end that the Corps does,
and had in those days. The Corps being almost
inclusive. Of course, as a veteran, we weren't in
the Corps. Most of us weren't. But I... Well, I just
remembered it as a very good place to work and enjoy
fellowship with other students. And it was
academically very sound, challenging to me. And
so I stayed. I graduated in 1948. Got a degree in
1948. I guess it was in June of 48. I can't think of
it. So
then I left A&M. At that time, A&M's graduate work
in physics didn't have the same
history or whatever the word is. It wasn't
established as well as the graduate work in
physics at certain other universities in the
country. And this was true a lot of places, because
A&M wasn't alone in that regard. So for graduate
work, in fact, there hadn't been any PhDs at all
granted at A&M in physics. And I had good advice
from Dr. James Potter, who was head of the
department then and was for many years
subsequently, to go off to graduate school. And I
went to Rice, went back to Rice to go to graduate
school in physics. And I guess it was five years
later I got a degree, a Ph.D., in 1953.
Now, I'm not telling you much about the way A&M was
in those days, but I have hinted that, of course, it
was all male in those days, but at least as far as I
remember it was. I don't know if there were any
girls there at all. There were, of course, ladies,
and I know there were lots of married students. And
I knew lots of my friends were married, and I got to
know the families and children and so forth. But
I was pretty much all business in those days. I
wasn't a member of any organizations, and I didn't
run for any offices of any sort. I felt that my main
goal was to be in school. And so that's really what I
did. I just went to school. But I enjoyed the
general atmosphere. And as I say, I made a lot of
lifelong friends, people whom I still know well
and see often, in some cases, not so often in
others, how far away they are and so forth. But I
remember distinctly that the distance between
College Station and Bryan in those days like the
distance between two little towns, you really
went on a country road. You went down Texas Avenue
to go from here to Bryan. We used to go into Bryan to
go to a picture show now and then. There was a show
downtown, so to speak. And when you rode along
Texas Avenue, you'd ride on a bumpy country
highway. I can't think what to compare it with
exactly around here, but it was a turtleback
highway. a road with a lot of trees on either side
and deep ditch, deep ditches and windmills and a
few farms here and there. And you go from one town to
another, you really knew you went to another town.
They really weren't contiguous cities as they are
now at Colley Station and Bryan. I remember that
very distinctly. I remember that Guyon Hall was
used in those days to show movies quite regularly,
whereas Guyon Hall doesn't exist anymore. And
there was that movie, and there was a movie at the
North Gate, which is still there, the campus
theater, which a lot of us used to go to just for fun,
especially on Sunday nights. That was a time to
goof off because the long week was ahead. But
that's one of the most distinct memories I have
about the community in those days is that really
they were a really separate little town,
separated. I don't remember distinctly about
College Avenue. College Avenue may have been more
nearly continuous in the sense of residences, but
I gather, as I remember, though, there were some
vacant lots and some open country in there. I just
beg to remember that. Because I know going to town,
we always seem to go on Highway 6 to go into Bryan.
One thing we used to do was go into... to a lady's
home who had served family-style meals. We were on
a real treat. There was a lady named Mrs. Ball,
whose sister maybe still runs the cafeteria out at
the Annex. I'm not sure about that. That's the same
family, anyway. Anyway, you'd go to that home, and
she had a nice big kitchen in the back, and guys
would go in the living room and go into the big
dining room there and sit at a table and have
family-style meals, which was always a treat.
And, of course, you eat that way. And the Corps, we
didn't. We weren't in the Corps. Where did you
live? I lived in various dorms. My first dorm was
dorm 16. Do they still call them by numbers over
here? Yes, they go up to 12. No, not 16. It was 12. I
must have been 12. I was in room 116. That's it.
Okay. Number 16 came to mind. There was a dorm...
numbered 16, I think, over here. In fact, what they
used to call them by numbers over in the old... See,
dorms very much like these are built in the
Northgate area. In fact, they're built at the same
time. Just west of...
What's the big old Walton Hall? West of Walton,
there's some dorms that are like the dorms in the
core area. I think there was a dorm 16, 17, 18 over
there. I'm not sure. Anyway, I lived first in dorm
18, then I lived in dorm 7 and other various dorms
over here. Then I lived in Walton Hall, G ramp, G1,
Walton. And I remember very well those various
rooms we lived in. My brother and I roomed
together. We were a few brother-roommate
roommates. pairs around. Most brothers broke up,
but my brother and I were good friends and got along
well. We're very nearly the same age, close
enough. He's bigger than I am and makes us look the
same age, although he's two years younger than I
am. So, uh, and I enjoyed dorm life. I enjoyed
knowing all the guys. But the dorm life wasn't
quite the same as it is in the Corps. It was
different in the sense that it was more informal,
of course. We just, we had that weren't scheduled
as tightly or scheduled as regularly as you are in
your regular organized activities in the Corps.
We lived among the Corps, though. Some of the dorms
near us would be Corps dorms, and we were always
aware that guys were falling out at certain times
and bugles were blowing and things of that sort.
But we never did respond to those bugles. We
weren't required to, fortunately. But because
your schedules were pretty demanding, as I
remember, up early and busy, which is fine. And we
were not unfamiliar with that sort of thing,
having been in the Army, all of us, for some years.
Knowing what it means to fall out at a certain time
and do things on a regular basis. How did the
community population, you know, the people, how
did they treat people at A&M? Did they treat you as a
veteran different from the poor? Or did they kind
of look at you all as Aggies? My general, as I
remember, we were all treated the same. I mean, if
you were a student at A&M, it was pretty... For one
thing, the population of the two towns... College
Station Bryan, as far as just people that were in
the town, was smaller than it is now by a long shot. I
don't know how much smaller, really. I don't have a
good estimate of that. I'm sure that can be looked
up. But I distinctly remember that College
Station was a very small community just around the
campus, peripheral to the campus. And the people
treated us all very politely, very, very well. I
remember, for example, hitchhiking. was routine
and comfortable and easy and safe and everybody
felt okay about it. I don't think people do quite
the same now. I mean, it's different now for
various reasons. The big cities are bigger and
they have bad reputations for people that do
hitchhiking and there's lots of reasons why
hitchhiking isn't a very good thing to do anymore.
Whereas in those days, hitchhiking was routine.
We had a place where we stood out there at the east
gate and along there and we'd just get in line and
then 20 minutes, even if the line was 40 or 50 people
long, 20, 30 minutes, you'd be on your way. And
nobody went upstream. That wasn't fair. You could
go downstream, catch somebody who just thought
about it a moment or something. But I used to get
rides into Houston just routinely, you know, and
never worry about it. I don't think I would
recommend that for my son, you know. I don't know
what you, do people still hitchhike very much? Not
quite as much as they used to. Most everybody has a
car. That's one big difference. In those days,
most of us didn't have cars. I didn't own a car until
I was, what, 26 years old, I guess. Whereas now,
people tend to own cars a good deal younger, and
it's normal. Then there would be less
hitchhiking. In those days, there were very few
cars on the campus, and some of the parking lots
that are in the middle of the campus were just
graveled. this lot 19 out here, right between us
and Hart Hall, you know? Very central parking lot.
That was a gravel, just a little gravel drive.
There may be enough room to accommodate 30 or 40
cars at most. Now it's all paved and curved, and I
don't know how many cars it accommodates, but it's
bigger than it was. So I remember, anyway. And, of
course, we have lots and lots of parking space and
still more parking problems, as you know. I'm sure
we all do because of the construction. But in
answer to your question, the people in town, both
towns, I thought were very nice. And I don't think
there was any distinction between the Corps and
non-reg, what we call non-reg students. I guess we
still call them non-regs. I don't know. Civilian
students. And... I just remember that I was well
treated, and I know the Corps was too, because
everybody respected the Corps, and still does, of
course, very highly. So, I remember that with
pleasure and being very pleasant. Once you got,
what'd you do right after you got your doctorate?
When I first got my doctorate, I had been a
consultant at what was then called the Humboldt
Oil and Refining Company. I'm sure you remember
when it was called Humboldt. It was only recently
changed to the name Exxon. I was a consultant
during my graduate school days at Rice with what's
called the Humboldt Research Labs. It was called
Production Research. And that was downtown
Houston when I first started there. In fact, it was
that way all the time I did consulting work and
summer work for Humboldt. And then I stayed on that
summer after I got my PhD and worked full time for
Humboldt. But in the meantime I had arranged to
come back to teach here. I talked to Dr. Potter and I
talked about it and we agreed that there was a
position for me here to teach. So I taught here for
one calendar year in 1953
through the August of 54, including the summer,
September through August, September 53 through
August of 54. So I was here one calendar year as an
assistant professor, and I enjoyed that very
much. I must say, in those days, I felt, see, I
wasn't married still, and I was thinking
that being unmarried and not being in a, community
that there was an excess of men, not very many girls
to meet.
But I thought I should be in an area where there was
more convenient social life and so forth.
Ironically, it turns out, however, that I had met
the girl that I did marry, finally. And she was a
girl that I had met in Houston. And fortunately, I
did marry. We did get married. But at that time, we
hadn't planned to get married. What I did then was I
had an opportunity to teach at the University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri. And I thought it
over, and I said, well, I probably should go ahead
and take the opportunity to go to another part of
the country. I had been away off and on anyway, as I
mentioned. Like in the war, I was in Europe and New
York and Colorado and California all around. And I
enjoyed being in Texas, but I also enjoyed the
opportunity to sample parts, other parts of the
world. And going to the Midwest seemed
attractive. And it was attractive. I went to the
University of Missouri and taught there. I guess I
taught there just eight years. And I
enjoyed it very much. I got married soon after
being up there, Joanne, my wife. I got married
in... 1955, I
guess, a year later in June of 55. And I was real,
real young then. Although I wasn't real old
either. So anyway, I was there first by myself and
then my wife. We got married and my wife joined me
there. She was there in Missouri. We were there.
Our son was born in Columbia, Missouri. We have one
son, David. I guess he was born in 1958. He's
a native Missourian. then for reasons involving
partly my interest, our interest in coming back to
Texas and my pleasant memories of A&M and the fact
that both my wife and I have family, our only family
really, we both have very small families. Her
parents died when she was fairly young. She has
only one close relative, it's a sister in Houston.
And it turns out my parents and brother were at that
time my only close family were in Houston too. So we
began to think in terms of the long-term future.
Did we want to be in the Midwest indefinitely, or
did we want to go back to an area like here and raise
our family, which happened to be one son. That's
the only child we ever had
here. And we decided that coming back here would be
better for everybody concerned, including other
parts of our family. So we came back. And I was very
lucky, luckily, an opportunity for me to come back
here arose at the right time. Although I was
planning to leave Missouri for two of the years and
I even let them know about it. It was a very orderly
resignation from Missouri. I had been promoted to
associate professor there and all that sort of
thing. I felt satisfied that I had performed well
enough to to do anything I wanted to, go elsewhere.
In those days, jobs for physicists were fairly
easy to come by, especially if you'd done some
research and had a reasonable reputation as a
teacher. So I approached Dr. Potter and mentioned
it to him maybe even a year before we finally made
the move, or longer than that, I don't know, but we
thought about it. And an opportunity did arise for
me to come back, and I came back here in 1962. And
I've been here, we have been here ever since. So
the basic story, the framework of my story here is
that I was here as a student in 1946, away for some
years after 1948, and then back again in 53, 54. And
during that time, things had changed a little bit.
There was a burgeoning of research activities,
which I noticed things had changed in that regard.
The graduate program was really moving to bigger
and better things. But my opportunity to go to
Missouri was attractive. never have regretted
doing that, but I'm always glad also to come back,
that we came back. Now we've been here since 1952,
which is what, 14 years? Almost 14 years, I guess.
And I'm very, we're very pleased to be back. One
thing, are we running close to the end of the tape?
No, well, no, we still have a pretty good time.
Okay, well, one thing that's, let's see, I was
going to say, Oh, well, in addition to the
attractiveness of A&M itself, as an academic
community, which it always has been to me, this
general area is attractive to anybody looking in
from the outside. If you're in the Midwest and you
don't realize it, if you're here all the time, but
if you're away from here, you realize... that this
part of the country is one of the most, well, it's
sought after. It's known to be prosperous. It's
known that the people are vigorous and active and
lots is going on here. By here, I mean generally in
the state of Texas and in particular in this part of
the state of Texas. Let's say the south or maybe the
south central and southeast part, Houston,
Brown-Dallas axis, so to speak, or whatever, how
you want to put it. So, and this part of the world is
looked on in great glowing terms in other parts of
the world, other parts of the country. And I was
pleased to know that that was a place where I had
been and I knew well, and people who visit here
from, say, my university there at the University
of Missouri would always come back and say, hey,
that's really some place down there. And a lot of
people I knew would come to A&M, and they'd come
back with glowing terms about A&M, which always
pleased me, because that's where I had been, and
that was my home, my alma mater, and so forth. And
you don't realize this until you get away from it,
how highly thought of. We're all very proud of A&M,
of course, but it's very nice to know that A&M looks
good from a distance, too. which is something you
always can be sure of unless you go to that distance
and talk to people. And that was one of the things,
that general prosperity, the general attitude of
people in this part of the country, I thought was
reassuring for the future. And I think that has
been borne out as you see what's happening to A&M
now. When we first came back to A&M, there were some
frustrations, frankly. I remember distinctly
having slightly different standards about such
things as libraries, academic participation and
student participation in governance, having
faculty and student senates to speak up about
certain things and have the regular
opportunities to do so. And when I first came back
to A&M in 1962,
I guess, politically aware than I had been before.
And some of the frustrations were, I thought, and I
still think, well-founded. I'm saying
frustrations in the sense that we had aspirations
to be more active as a faculty
And we had aspirations for the student body, as
citizens of the community, to have an input to
what's going on and what should be done. And as you
know, we now have a very active, perhaps
hyperactive, that depends on whose opinions you
listen to, student senates and things of that
sort, all sorts of student activities which
involve making decisions and influencing
decisions at policy level. And I believe in that
sort of thing very strongly. I think that at least
people should have their say and then have a
regular way to say it, other than just to go around
mumbling to each other and complaining to each
other causes more trouble, I think, than to have
open forums. and discussions with the
administration and so forth. And we've made great
progress in that regard. Mr. Rutter was a very good
president in many ways. But in other ways, I think,
frankly, that he wasn't the very good president of
the university. It may have been that his way to
lead us from one era to another was to be benevolent
autocrat. He wasn't.